>>Introduction:
Among the family of stem cells, pluripotent stem cell (PSC) represents the most useful class. The word "pluripotent" means being capable of differentiating into all kinds of functional cells, rendering it promising for modelling disase, testing drugs and regenerative medicine. 

Induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) and Embryonic Stem cells (ESC) are two major classes of PSC's. iPSC is induced from mature somatic cells while ESC is taken from early developing embryo. Such difference leads to controversies on ethnics and on technicalities.

>> Technology
iPSC's have been obtained from human fibroblasts, keratinocytes, peripheral blood cells. Such somatic cells are first collected from the host and then induced to express a cocktail of transcription factors, delivered with retroviral/lentiviral transfection. These transcription factors then effect to alter the cellular identity to re-establish pluripotency. The cell culture is then screened for the pluripotency marker, to identify the resultant iPSC's. 

The mechanism of transcription factors is not fully understood but is slowly unravelled. The process can be viewed in 2 major stages. Firstly, factors bind to chromosomal region inaccessible to other factors and alter its morphology. Secondly, a cascade of events take place, shifting the transcription profile towards to a PSC style. 

The receipe of the cocktail is constantly updating. Whereas the original OSKM includes Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 and Myc, the new recipe includes histone deacetylase to improve chromosomal accessibility.

Like everything, there is a tradeoff. On one hand, one wants to increase the induction efficiency. On the other hand, one wants as little mutation as possible to ensure the iPSC is safe for clinical purpose. For example, shutting down p53 apppear to increase the  efficiency, but at the same increase the mutational rate. ;

>> The Unknowns

Is it effective?
1. Nowadays with the improved cocktail, iPSC can even produce chimeric mice if grafted onto a mouse embryo -- acheving the "gold standard" for pluripotency. However, the human iPSC is still shown to differ from the ESC in gene expression and epigenetic markers.

clinical trials
2. Does the implanted PSC really integrate into the tissue? Some study reports post-implant degeneration of ESC's, rendering the treatment meaningless. However, cellular tracking shows iPSC's fully integrated if implanted into mice. Sometimes even animal models can be misleading if the readout phemonmean is species specific.

Thus, to show the treatment has theraputic relevance, one needs to carefully design and analyse animal models, with some good luck.

Is it safe to use?
1.

>> History
Life was once thought to be a one-way phenomena from birth to death. The success of somatic cell nuclear transfer (known as cloning) opens up the field of rejuvenation. In other words, a single mature cell possess the potential to give birth to a new individual, what is now known as pluripotency. Not only we can go back on the road of life, we can also stop at its early stage and choose the path to follow. Thanks to the stem cell technology, we can keep Pluripotent stem cells (PSC's) undifferentiated indefinitely due to its intrinsic immortality, as well as to instruct it to differentiate at our will. 

Moreover, the methods to obtain PSC's have expanded to be non-invasive. Originally PSC was taken from early embryos, which inevitably impose an adverse effect or even complete abolishment of the embryo, causing ethnic concerns and technical difficulties. With the advancement in molecular biology, scientists are now able to induce any mature cell to become PSC that resembles every aspect of embryo-derived PSC, opening up unprecedented possibilities for PSC-based therapy and research.

Although promising, the safety and efficacy of PSC-based therapy is still being evaluated during clinical trials, whereas the PSC technology itself is constantly being improved to achieve better efficiency for industrial applicability. The era of PSC is only at its dawning.

>> Application
PSC has been extensively exploited since its discovery. It has greatly improved disease modelling by allowing people to do experiments on human cells 

>> Legals
Stem cell therapy is subject to stringent regulation by FDA. 

